Today, I'll be talking about the R Package Validation Framework, which is a project I've
been working on for the past little over a year or so now. And I'm really excited to
share with you all what we've been working on and the updates that have come out of this.
So my name is Ellis Hughes. I'm a statistical programmer. I have a background working in
statistical genetics. Currently, I work at Fred Hutch under Sharp working on HIV vaccine
research. I'm pretty heavily involved in the R community. I'm one of the Seattle Use
R Organizers. I also am one of the organizers for the Cascadia RConf. And I also run a screencast
called TidyX, where we go through and explain how R code works, usually from Tidy Tuesday
submissions. So you can find me on Twitter at Ellis underscore Hughes.
So a common question that any of us, if we've ever tried to introduce new software into
the pharma world is, is it validated? That's a question that we're always going to be getting.
Is it validated? But what is validation? It can mean different things to different people.
Yes, there's an official definition, but it means different things to different people.
So as I understand it, the definition of validation is establishing documentary evidence that
our software performs some sort of process, procedure, activity, and compliance with our
specifications with a high degree of assurance. So in layman's terms, we're creating documents
to prove that our software does what we say it does.
But why do we even care about validation? Why is that question even asked? Well, a lot
of people refer to the fact that we'd have to validate our software for FDA submission.
But there's a lot of unspoken benefits around validation that don't always get talked about,
such as improved quality and safety of our code, because we've gone through and checked
it. We're confident in the quality of the code, as well as the fact that it'll return
proper results. It results in faster processing. Because we already have this code now set
up, we can use it across multiple projects and trust that it'll work. And then it also
promotes trust. Because we've performed this validation, we've gone through and vetted
it the best to our abilities. So we are confident that when we give it an input, it'll give
us a consistent output, as well as throw an error when things go out of bounds.
So validation practice can be a really high bar. And there's a lot of documents that go
into creating validation. Because first, you have to fill out a form for specifications,
planned uses, environments you're going to be using it in. Then write out some of your
code based on those specifications. Record the function authorship in some external file,
potentially an Excel file. Then get another form to document your test cases, test environment,
how you plan on doing your testing. Then maybe the last form to show how your testing plan
is comprehensive, that you're proving that all your specifications are being met through
your testing plan. Have a third party come through and manually evaluate your tests and
get screenshots for results. And then you have to review your documentation, combine
it into a final validation packet for release. But information is shared across all of these
documents. So any time one of them updates, you need to go back and update it. And if
you manually evaluated all your tests and had to make an update, you're going to have
to go through and rerun everything. So it's incredibly inefficient. And at any time, it
can feel like game over because you're just redoing your work over and over again.
But today, I want to tell you that validation and R can be best friends. They can work together
to provide a validation framework such that we can achieve all the goals of validation
without as much additional stress and work that can be involved with that. Using a combination
of R Markdown, TestStat, and Roxygen2, we can essentially make validation push button
for validation and generate a document that looks like this, where we're able to capture
a place for signatures for everyone that's been involved with the project. We're able
to have information about the environment in which we performed our validation and record
who wrote what pieces of the project, the specs, the functions, the test cases, the
code, as well as share what the coverage is between our specs and our test cases. And
finally, record all of our content here, including our test results, all at the click
of a button without having to redo as much work. And this is the R package validation
framework. So there's five key elements to the framework. There's recording your specs,
writing your code, recording your test cases, writing your test code, and finally generating
the documentation. The advantage of using this framework is, well, it's integrated into
the R package development process. It takes you from the beginning of the ideation of
I want to create a package all the way through the process to creating a package that now
you've validated. It's native to R programmers. This framework lives within the R package
itself. So you don't have to leave your R package environment in order to perform your
validation or have all the documents in there. It allows for iterative development. Because
we don't have docs living across multiple locations, it allows us to update pieces without
having to make sure that we've updated the five different other documents with that piece
of information. It's reusable and extensible because it's reliant on code. We're able to
just rerun things and make sure it'll just run and work. And it's extensible. If you
want to move pieces out of your package into a more utility focused package, you can totally
do that and just copy out your test cases and specs and whatnot into that new package.
And you don't have to be putting in a whole new round of effort into doing that.
So we're going to start at the beginning, which is specifications. Now, specifications
define the expectations of a package. So you kind of think of that as like the blueprints
for your package. So it's really defining what is the goal of your package. A good specification
is it is going to have several different elements. It's like, what will the thing be doing? What
are the expected inputs? What are the expected outputs? What are warnings or errors that
should be triggered when things like letting us know, letting the user know when things
are going out of bounds? But critically, a specification will not rely on external knowledge.
You can assume that there's basic knowledge in the programmer side of things, but do not
assume that they have contextual knowledge around the statistics or the process you may
be trying to create into your R package. So if I were to be writing a specification for
my presentation today, I'll say my presentation will cover the contents, my team's approach
to validation. It'll be roughly 15 to 20 minutes long and it'll be entertaining. Now, when
I go to convert that into a specification file that I'd save into my package, it needs
to have these several different pieces here. First, it needs to be machine readable because
we're going to need to be able to read that later on. It's going to need to be independent.
So we don't want to have multiple specification files that link back to one another because
that can create codependencies and make it difficult to separate pieces out. And then
close proximity to the task. So we want to have it saved within our R package so that
it lives where the programmers are doing their work. When we're documenting our specifications
other than the actual specifications themselves, we really want to be capturing information
such as who wrote those specifications and when it was written. So if I were to be taking
the specification that are earlier and converting it into what I'd be using for the R package
validation framework, I would use something like this. And it's written in Markdown where
we have I have a header at the very top there where I have the section where I wrote that
spec and I wrote it on this date. My specifications are my presentation will clearly explain the
validation procedure. It'll be 15 to 20 minutes long and it'll be entertaining. And I'll measure
that by causing at least three people to laugh. And optionally, spec 1.4, fame, glamour and
maybe start a branded accessory chain. We'll see. All right. So let's get down to business.
We have our specs. It's code development time, the piece we've all been waiting for.
And don't worry, I'm not going to sit here and tell you how to write code. I am going
to trust that you're going to be following good programming practices and everything
around that. However, what I am going to talk about is documenting your code for validation.
And what we want to be capturing around that is who wrote the code, when they wrote it
and making sure to update the documentation of ownership whenever the code gets updated.
The way we're going to go about doing that is using Roxygen tags. So if you're writing
your code according to good programming practice, you're going to be adding documentation around
that. And a lot of folks are going to use Roxygen to do so. So we suggest using these
two Roxygen tags at section last updated by and at section last updated date to capture
this information. And the value of doing this is it provides close proximity to the task.
Whoever is actually working on the function at that time doesn't have to go to an external
word or document to make sure to update. Oh, I update if this function here and this is when
I did it. No, it's actually right there with the function. So it makes it simple to do.
It's a natural extension of the documentation already being performed because we're already
using Roxygen too. And an added benefit is it adds documentation that the functions itself
because it's a Roxygen doc or Roxygen tag. It's actually when you compile your documentation,
it'll be added in there. So this is a simple function that I wrote. It's a joke where you
have a punch line and a setup. But really what we care about is this lot, these two
Roxygen tags here. So I was the one that wrote this function and this is when I wrote it.
And it's a very simple function. But say Joe King came through and updated my joke to make
it so that had a new parameter. So the user could specify how long it waited before it
delivered the punch line. Well, Joe updated that. He updated his normal Roxygen tags,
but then he also updated the updated by and date to Joe and when he updated it.
And now that we now that that's in there, when he regenerates the documentation,
the help pages have who wrote that function and when they updated it. So you are now the owner
of that that function for validation purposes. Cool. All right. So now we're going to connect
the dots. So we have our code and we have our specs, but we need to prove that we've met our
specs. And the way we do that is through test cases. So test cases prove what you wanted to do
to what you did. Now, a single test case can satisfy multiple specifications if it's covering
a lot of the functions that you're going to be using and stuff like that, you can prove that
you've met your specifications. However, every single specification must be satisfied by at
least one test case. And the risk of a specification drives them the level of testing performance,
the number of times you'll be testing that function with new inputs.
Now, a good test case will will share which specifications are being met and how they're
being met. Detail the required setup. So if there's any data that I need to be loading in,
if there's any environment variables need to be setting that little detail, this is what you need
to be doing. It'll be it's a recipe, really, for how to get from this setup input into the desired
output with clear expectations for what you're going to be testing against. So if you're reading
in a data set, you want to be clear to say, rather than saying, check the length, go check
that the length of this data set is thirty four rows. But critically, there's no code provided
because you want whoever is going to be performing the test testing to not be able to copy and paste
the code because then you didn't actually test it. When you're documenting your test cases,
we're going to capture the same information that we have been who wrote the test and when they
wrote it. But we're also going to capture which specifications are being satisfied because that
can update as tests update. And we're going to use Roxton tag surprise, surprise to do that.
So at such and less updated by at such and less updated date and at such and specification
coverage. And so if I were to be writing a test case for my presentation today,
I have my sections at the top here. So I wrote this test case. This is when I wrote it. And
these are the the the test case and which specs are being covered. I have a setup where I create
my presentation. Then I will go through and prove that I met my specifications by my first test,
test that the presentation was informative by asking my audience that they what they learned.
I will time my presentation, make sure it's between 15 and 20 minutes long and tested as
entertaining, accounting the number of chuckles from the audience, which unfortunately I can't
hear you right now. Hopefully you're laughing. Or when I practice it to my significant other,
the number of eye rolls. And trust me, there were a few of them. All right. So now we have all
the setup here. So now we're going to fill in the lines with test coding. So test coding is
the actual implementation of the test cases in code. We're going to be recording the results
to prove that we've met our specifications. But very, very importantly, a third party
be doing this to somebody that was not involved in the writing of the package or the writing of
the test cases can now go through and perform the testing. They could have written the specifications.
But so the benefits of doing this test coding, it's going to help resolve interpretation errors
in your documentation and examples because this person doesn't actually know how to
use your package. They're able to they're going to be using your documentation to see
how they're supposed to be achieving the test cases that you lay out. And if they have any,
they can raise any questions about it, about your documentation. And this wasn't very clear to me
because you're as the author intrinsically understand how the function is supposed to be
behaving. This new person doesn't know that. So they can ask you to improve your documentation
or examples. If the test case itself isn't very clear, they're going to come to the wrong conclusion.
And so then it's going to fail and they are able to you're able to go back and then improve your
test cases. And the failing test case is not necessarily a bad thing. It just means that you
need to improve your documentation. And then any any interpretation errors in your specifications,
if they didn't write their specifications, well, they can once again go back and help improve
those. And then in general, it helps identify improvement. So if your code runs slowly or if
an argument is incredibly clear, they're able to go back and go, hey, we were missing this argument
here. Can you please add that in? As I was going through the test cases, it didn't really make a
whole bunch of sense to be able to have to set it up this way. And so it really allows for iterative
improvement before you even get to the first release. So we're going to use a combination
of test that and surprise, surprise for oxygen, too. We're going to document our test code with
who wrote the test code and when they were using the same rocks and tags last updated by and last
updated date. And so this is an example of what some test code might look like. So we have the
header here at the top. And so each test piece will have its own test that section here. It's
exactly like any other test that but we have this last updated by just her last updated date.
Here's the expectation, the test they have, the code they run and the expectations completely
like any other test. And the reason we're using test that it's a familiar framework.
It's used by a ton of packages on crane right now. It's it's this de facto standard basically
at this point for unit testing. So we're going to kind of steal that and use it for our purposes.
It can also be run and developed either interactively or in batch. So we don't
have to have somebody manually running it, but they can manually run it as they're building up
their test. But the the real and the big reason why we use test that is for the reporter objects
that live within test that. So reporter objects are a special object that live inside tests that
help track and test each expectation and reports whether they succeed or if they do fail, why they
failed. And that's very important because we need to track that for our validation purposes.
So a standard reporter object output kind of looks like this. So if you've ever built a package and
done like control shift T after you put unit tests in there, you've actually used a reporter object.
You just didn't really know because under the hood. But what we were able to do is we took we
execute the reporter object, but then we use a custom function to extract the results for us
and make a nice table that shows which test was run, whether the results were as expected or if
they were different, what what they were that was different and then a pass or fail. And we can put
that into a table. Right. Proof is in the pudding. So what do we have so far? We have our specifications.
We have our code. We have a test cases and our test code. But, you know, as we said,
validation was all about documenting that we did all this. And this is our validation documentation.
So we're going to use our markdown to create a vignette where we're going to record all of the
all the information that we created so far into a vignette. We're going to have a sign off slash
approval section based on your organizational requirement. We're going to capture environmental
information such as the R version and package dependency versions in the R markdown because
it's dynamic. It'll update whenever you rerun your validation documentation. And here you can also
capture any other organizational requirements that might have been found in any other documents
for validation. Then using our markdown, we're going to dynamically read in our specifications.
Once again, it was very critical that they were machine readable. Scrape the test code for
authorship, read in the test cases and drop those into the document and then execute all the test
code and capture those results into the tables that we saw. And so this is the general format
of what you might see your package as under the vignettes folder. We're going to have the
validation R&D, which is going to have all that code in setup and recording of the environments.
This is then going to be the results, typically in a PDF. We're going to have our validation
folder where we have our specs, our test cases and our test code and all the content underneath
there. So all together now. So like I said, we're going to use R markdown, test that and Roxygen too.
And with their powers combined, we're able to generate a reproducible validation report at the
click of a button or at the build of a package because it lives in the vignettes folder. And
when you build it, you can tell it to execute your vignettes so you can make sure that you don't
have an R package that has failed its validation. And we generate this exact same report that we
had before. But now you know where all this came from. We wrote in these signature pages here.
This validation environment was scraped or was generated at the build of this document.
We pulled in all this information about who wrote these specifications, who wrote the functions,
who wrote the test cases, who wrote the test code. We were able to show coverage of all the
specifications to the test cases. And we're able to drop it all into this document dynamically.
We don't have to manually go through and update it every time.
So that's that's the framework. Where are we at now? So currently I'm working on a white paper
with a team from Fuse to describe the framework process in more detail, as well as generalizing
and recording the optimal processes that we suggest you follow when you're using this framework.
And it's very much under construction. Hopefully it'll be coming out later this year. Really
excited for this. We're also working on a ValTools R package. So this is going to be based on the
white paper. It's very much in progress, but it'll provide tooling that's not currently available
with use this or dev tools to help folks perform their validations using this framework. And
hopefully that'll be coming out later this year as well. So many thanks to all the folks that have
been involved with this framework, Fred Hutch, so Marie Venditulli, Anthony Williams, Jimmy,
Barthi, Raphael, Alicia, Shannon, Paul and Kate, as well as the folks that are on the Fuse R package
validation framework working group, because you really helped me figure out how to expand this
framework and really make it more general so it works for more folks. So hopefully now you
understand that validation and R can truly live together forever. Thank you very much for having
me talk today. RStudio as well as Procogia and putting this together. You can find more code in
this presentation at github.com slash the bioengineers slash validation underscore RStudio
underscore 2021. Thank you so much.